MON-3193: Proposal to switch from prometheus-adapter to metrics-server for implementing resource metric API (#1426)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/monitoring/replace-prometheus-adapter-with-metrics-server.md

---
title: replace-prometheus-adapter-with-metrics-server
authors:
  - "@slashpai"
reviewers:
  - "@simonpasquier"
  - "@dgrisonnet"
  - "@openshift/openshift-team-monitoring"
approvers: 
  - "@simonpasquier"
  - "@dgrisonnet"
  - "@openshift/openshift-team-monitoring"
api-approvers:
  - "@deads2k"
creation-date: 2023-06-20
last-updated: 2023-06-20
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3153
---

# Replace prometheus-adapter with metrics-server

## Summary

This proposal suggests replacing the [prometheus-adapter](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/prometheus-adapter) currently used for monitoring resource metrics in OpenShift with the [metrics-server](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server).

## Motivation

For autoscaling OpenShift needs a resource metrics implementation. Currently this depends on CMO's Prometheus stack.

Reasons to consider to moving to metrics-server are:

> 1. Initially we planned using [prometheus-adapter](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/prometheus-adapter) for custom metrics API too but the direction has now shifted towards KEDA [OCPNODE-708]((https://issues.redhat.com/browse/OCPNODE-708)) so there's little incentive from the OpenShift monitoring team's perspective to continue investing into prometheus-adapter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Simplified Monitoring Architecture** By replacing prometheus-adapter with metrics-server, we can reduce the complexity and maintenance overhead of the monitoring system in OpenShift since `metrics-server` does not rely on Prometheus.
```

> 2. Deploying and configuring Prometheus Adapter requires additional effort compared to Metrics Server. It involves setting up and maintaining a Prometheus instance alongside the adapter. Some users would like to opt-out of running a fully fledged Prometheus stack, see [MON-3152](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3152).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Deploying and configuring Prometheus Adapter requires additional effort compared to Metrics Server. Prometheus Adapter is tightly coupled to Prometheus and this creates a bottleneck for allowing monitoring as  optional feature. see [MON-3152](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3152).
```

> 3. Utilizing Prometheus Adapter effectively may require some familiarity with Prometheus and its query language (PromQL). This learning curve could be a drawback for users not already familiar with Prometheus.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Utilizing Prometheus Adapter effectively may require some familiarity with Prometheus and its query language (PromQL). This learning curve could be a drawback for users not already familiar with Prometheus.
```
for HPA, users do not need to know promql but yes, it is indeed needed configure PA.

> 3. [prometheus-adapter](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/prometheus-adapter) project will be archived soon due to difficulty in maintaining the project

Reviewer: I think this should move to top and one of the main reasons to consider replacing prometheus-adapter with `metrics-server`

### User Stories

> #### Story 1

Reviewer: Perhaps we should mention the already requested feature - Optional Monitoring

* As a cluster admin, I want a more lightweight and efficient solution for monitoring resource metrics in my cluster, so that I can optimize cluster performance and resource allocation.

#### Story 2

* As a cluster admin, I want a simplified monitoring architecture in OpenShift, so that I can reduce the complexity and maintenance overhead of the monitoring system.

#### Story 3

> * As a Developer, I would like to opt out of Prometheus stack to monitor cluster performance but I need resource metrics API for enabling HPA for my applications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* As a cluster admin, I would like to opt out of Prometheus stack to monitor while maintaining HPA. [MON-3152]
```

### Goals

> * If user enabled to deploy metrics-server deploy it as part of CMO

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Provide an option to configure and deploy Metric Server thought a configuration / feature flag of CMO
```

* Remove prometheus-adapter resources once metrics-server is deployed and functional
* Allow reverting back to prometheus-adapter incase user enabled this

### Non-Goals

* Allow optional prometheus stack

## Proposal

The proposal is to replace the Prometheus Adapter with the Metrics Server for monitoring resource metrics in OpenShift.

### Workflow Description

The workflow for using the Metrics Server in OpenShift for monitoring resource metrics would involve the following steps:

1. User sets `enableMetricsServer: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config`
1. Deploy and configure the metrics-server in the OpenShift cluster

> 1. Verify metrics-server resource API is functional by running sample queries

Reviewer: Doesn't this already require the step below?

1. Update APIService resource to point to metrics-server API instead of prometheus-adapter API

> 1. Delete prometheus-adapter deployment

Reviewer: Something to consider, should we scale down the deployment instead?

#### Variation [optional]

> 1. User sets `enableMetricsServer: false` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config`

Reviewer: How about using FeatureGates instead?

Author: Good catch

1. Deploy and configure the prometheus-adapter in the OpenShift cluster.
1. Verify prometheus-adapter resource API is functional by running sample queries
1. Update APIService resource to point to  prometheus-adapter API instead of metrics-server API
1. Delete metrics-server Deployment

### API Extensions

TBD

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Configuration/Enablement

metrics-server is not enabled by default. It must be explicitly enabled by the user. It is enabled by setting 

> `enableMetricsServer: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config`

Reviewer: How about we replace this section with FeatureGate?

> **Note:** Long term the existing cluster-monitoring-config will be moved to dedicated custom resources and CRDs but are out of scope for this enhancement.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** In the long run, the existing cluster-monitoring-config which is currently a config-map will be moved to a Custom Resource  and is out of scope for this enhancement.
```

## Motivation

For autoscaling OpenShift, a resource metrics implementation is necessary. Currently, this is dependent on cluster monitoring operator(CMO) managed Prometheus stack.

Reasons to consider to moving to Metrics Server are:

1. **Upcoming Archival of prometheus-adapter:** The Prometheus Adapter project will soon be archived due to difficulties in maintaining the project, making it less desirable for long-term usage.

1. **Simplified Monitoring Architecture:** By replacing Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server, we can reduce the complexity and maintenance overhead of the monitoring system in OpenShift since `metrics-server` does not rely on Prometheus.

1. **Lightweight Solution:** Deploying and configuring Prometheus Adapter requires additional effort compared to Metrics Server. Prometheus Adapter is tightly coupled to Prometheus and this creates a bottleneck for allowing monitoring as  optional feature. See [MON-3152](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3152).

> 

Reviewer 2: can we add "better accuracy" (by default metrics-server will take into account the sample timestamps) and "increased robustness" (one only component not depending on an external service)?

### User Stories

#### Story 1

* Inorder to provide [optional built-in monitoring](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3152) feature we need to provide a way for customers to do HPA other than through Prometheus based Prometheus Adapter.

#### Story 2

* As a cluster admin, I want a more lightweight and efficient solution for monitoring resource metrics in my cluster, so that I can optimize cluster performance and resource allocation.

#### Story 3

* As a cluster admin, I want a simplified monitoring architecture in OpenShift, so that I can reduce the complexity and maintenance overhead of the monitoring system.

### Goals

* Replace Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server while maintaining feature parity with the existing stack 
* Ensure no performance regression occurs when replacing Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server
* Allow Prometheus Adapter to Metrics Server transition (and vice-versa) through a configuration or feature-flag.

### Non-Goals

> * Allow optional prometheus stack

Reviewer 2: You mean "Support optional cluster monitoring", right?

## Proposal

The proposal is to replace the Prometheus Adapter with the Metrics Server for monitoring resource metrics in OpenShift.

### Workflow Description

The workflow for using the Metrics Server in OpenShift for monitoring resource metrics would involve the following steps:

1. User sets `enableMetricsServer: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config`

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:
      name: cluster-monitoring-config
      namespace: openshift-monitoring
    data:
      config.yaml: |
        enableMetricsServer: true 
    ```

> 1. Deploy and configure the metrics-server in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Deploy the metrics-server resources in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace
```

> 1. Verify `metrics-server` resource API is functional by querying metrics-server endpoint (TBD)

Author: I checked this but this doesn't seem possible. I think checking for pods READY is enough to makesure metrics-server is functional?

cc: @sthaha @simonpasquier

Reviewer 2: Hmm, why isn't it possible?

1. Update `APIService` resource to point to metrics-server API instead of `prometheus-adapter` API
1. Delete/Scale Down `prometheus-adapter` deployment

#### Variation [optional]

NA

### API Extensions

> - Addition of a new field to the `cluster-monitoring-config` ConfigMap

Reviewer 2: we need the usual fields (tolerations, node selector, resource requests, ...) for metrics-server too?

  ```go
  type ClusterMonitoringConfiguration struct {
    // Enable MetricsServer

>     EnableMetricsServer bool `json:"enableMetricsServer,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: I would make it a bool pointer so that we can flip the default as we want.

```suggestion
    EnableMetricsServer *bool `json:"enableMetricsServer,omitempty"`
```

  }
  ```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Configuration/Enablement

Metrics Server is not enabled by default. It must be explicitly enabled by the user. It is enabled by setting 
`enableMetricsServer: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config`

> **Note:** In the long run, the existing cluster-monitoring-config which is currently a config-map will be moved to a Custom Resource  and is out of scope for this enhancement.

Reviewer 2: can be added to the non-goals section?

#### Resource Impact

Once metrics-server is enabled, by default 2 replicas of metrics-server instances are being deployed in the openshift-monitoring namespace.

As of OpenShift 4.13 the following idle resource usage have been measured:

Kubelet: TBD
Metrics Server: TBD

**TODO:** Capture the details on performance testing done from [MON-3210](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3210)

### Risks and Mitigations

One of the risk is resource impact on larger clusters. We need to do performance testing on larger OpenShift cluster to measure the impact on Kubelet when metrics-server is deployed.

[MON-3210](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3210) is created for doing this.

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

> [custom-metrics-autoscaler](https://github.com/openshift/custom-metrics-autoscaler-operator) also deploys metrics-server when user enables it, will this affect metrics-server we deploy in monitoring stack?

Reviewer 2: Can you link to where it's happening? This is new to me.

Author: when keda controller is created after installing operator I see metrics-server is deployed as well
https://github.com/openshift/custom-metrics-autoscaler-operator/blob/39aa2b9d5a0db2206d4963fe2e551178e7d369ad/controllers/keda/kedacontroller_controller.go#L204C2-L210.

### Test Plan

The proposed solution will be tested with two suites:

* Unit tests - running independently of each other and without side effects
* End to end tests - in the same repository as the cluster-monitoring-operator. These tests will be executed against an actual Kubernetes cluster and are intended to verify end-to-end functionality of the entire system.

### Graduation Criteria

> We plan to have the feature released Tech Preview first. We would like to test the performance of metrics-server on larger clusters first

Reviewer 2: As we're not using a CRD for CMO configuration, can you expand a bit on our TechPreview approach?

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale).
* Sufficient time for feedback including signals from telemetry about the customer adoption (e.g. number of metrics-server deployment across the fleet).
* Counter-measures to avoid service degradation of the Kubelet.
* Conduct load testing.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing feature
- Deprecate the feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

TBD

### Version Skew Strategy

TBD

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

TBD

#### Failure Modes

TBD

#### Support Procedures

TBD

## Implementation History

N/A

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 2: An alternative would be a standalone metrics-server operator that would work in conjunction with CMO. I think it's worth explaining the pros and cons.

---
title: replace-prometheus-adapter-with-metrics-server
authors:
  - "@slashpai"
reviewers:
  - "@simonpasquier"
  - "@dgrisonnet"
  - "@openshift/openshift-team-monitoring"
approvers: 

>   - "@simonpasquier"

Reviewer 2: I'd add @dgrisonnet as an approver.

  - "@openshift/openshift-team-monitoring"
api-approvers:
  - "@deads2k"
creation-date: 2023-06-20
last-updated: 2023-06-26
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3153
---

# Replace prometheus-adapter with metrics-server

## Summary

This proposal suggests replacing the [Prometheus Adapter](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/prometheus-adapter) currently used for implementing the resource [metrics API](https://github.com/kubernetes/metrics) in OpenShift with the [Metrics Server](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server).

## Motivation

For vertical and horizontal pod autoscaling, a resource metrics API implementation is necessary. Currently, OpenShift relies on the Prometheus stack and Prometheus adapter managed by the Cluster Monitoring Operator (CMO).

Reasons to consider to moving to Metrics Server are:

1. **Upcoming Archival of prometheus-adapter:** The Prometheus Adapter project will soon be archived due to difficulties in maintaining the project, making it less desirable for long-term usage.

> 1. **Simplified Monitoring Architecture:** By replacing Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server, we can reduce the complexity and maintenance overhead of the monitoring system in OpenShift since `metrics-server` does not rely on Prometheus.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Simplified and more robust Monitoring architecture:** By replacing Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server, we can reduce the complexity and maintenance overhead of the monitoring system. Since `metrics-server` does not rely on Prometheus, the resources metrics API would remain functional even when the Prometheus service is down.
```

1. **Lightweight Solution:** Deploying and configuring Prometheus Adapter requires additional effort compared to Metrics Server. Prometheus Adapter is tightly coupled to Prometheus and this creates a bottleneck for allowing monitoring as  optional feature. See [MON-3152](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3152).

1. **Better Accuracy:**  By default, the Metrics Server takes into account the timestamps of metric samples, allowing for accurate tracking of resource utilization over time. This means you can rely on the Metrics Server to provide a more precise understanding of how resources are being utilized by your applications.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

> * Inorder to provide [optional built-in monitoring](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3152) feature we need to provide a way for customers to do HPA other than through Prometheus based Prometheus Adapter.

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
* In order to provide [optional built-in monitoring](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3152) feature we need to provide a way for customers to do HPA other than through Prometheus based Prometheus Adapter.
```

#### Story 2

> * As a cluster admin, I want a more lightweight and efficient solution for monitoring resource metrics in my cluster, so that I can optimize cluster performance and resource allocation.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about the persona. The cluster admin probably doesn't care so much about which of metrics-server or prometheus-adapter is used. But they should care about the improved accuracy.

Reviewer 3: +1 The accuracy improvements are a nice positive. And this will allow us to drop our workaround (dedicated resource metrics service monitor) and reduce config complexity.
The resource improvements will only really be realized when we have option in-cluster monitoring.

### Goals

* Replace Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server while maintaining feature parity with the existing stack 
* Ensure no performance regression occurs when replacing Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server
* Allow Prometheus Adapter to Metrics Server transition (and vice-versa) through a configuration or feature-flag.

### Non-Goals

* Allow optional cluster monitoring stack
* Moving `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` config-map to a Custom Resource

## Proposal

The proposal is to replace the Prometheus Adapter with the Metrics Server for monitoring resource metrics in OpenShift.

### Workflow Description

The workflow for using the Metrics Server in OpenShift for monitoring resource metrics would involve the following steps:

1. User sets `enableMetricsServer: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config`

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:
      name: cluster-monitoring-config
      namespace: openshift-monitoring
    data:
      config.yaml: |

>         enableMetricsServer: true 

Reviewer 2: let's have a separate entry for all metrics-server parameters:

```suggestion
        metricsServer:
                enabled: true 
                tolerations: ...
```

    ```

1. Deploy the metrics-server resources in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace
1. Verify `metrics-server` resource API is functional by querying metrics-server endpoint (TBD)
1. Update `APIService` resource to point to metrics-server API instead of `prometheus-adapter` API
1. Delete/Scale Down `prometheus-adapter` deployment and delete Prometheus Adapter related resources

#### Variation [optional]

NA

### API Extensions

- We propose to add a new boolean field `enableMetricsServer` and type `metricsServer` to the
`openshift-montoring/cluster-monitoring-config` configmap. 

  ```go
  type ClusterMonitoringConfiguration struct {
    ...
    // Enable MetricsServer

>     EnableMetricsServer *bool `json:"enableMetricsServer,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: I'd move the "enable" flag to the metricsServer key.

### Test Plan

The proposed solution will be tested with two suites:

* Unit tests - running independently of each other and without side effects
* End to end tests - in the same repository as the cluster-monitoring-operator. These tests will be executed against an actual Kubernetes cluster and are intended to verify end-to-end functionality of the entire system.

### Graduation Criteria

We plan to have the feature released Tech Preview first. We would like to test the performance of metrics-server on larger clusters first

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale).
* Sufficient time for feedback including signals from telemetry about the customer adoption (e.g. number of metrics-server deployment across the fleet).
* Counter-measures to avoid service degradation of the Kubelet.
* Conduct load testing.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing feature
- Deprecate the feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

TBD

### Version Skew Strategy

TBD

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

> TBD

Reviewer 2: We need to mention the usual PDB and anti-affinity rules.

1. **Lightweight Solution:** Deploying and configuring Prometheus Adapter requires additional effort compared to Metrics Server. Prometheus Adapter is tightly coupled to Prometheus and this creates a bottleneck for allowing monitoring as optional feature. See [MON-3152](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3152).

1. **Better Accuracy:**  By default, the Metrics Server takes into account the timestamps of metric samples, allowing for accurate tracking of resource utilization over time. This means you can rely on the Metrics Server to provide a more precise understanding of how resources are being utilized by your applications.

1. **Scability:** Starting from `v0.5.0` Metrics Server comes with default resource requests that guarantee good performance for most cluster configurations and it continues to do [scale testing](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server/blob/077a462cd660beef705afb0a4a14a707ef39c4f2/FAQ.md#how-large-can-clusters-be) which is not the case for Prometheus Adapter.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

> * In order to provide [optional built-in monitoring](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3152) feature we need to provide a way for customers to do HPA other than through Prometheus based Prometheus Adapter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* In order to provide [optional built-in monitoring](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3152) feature we need to provide a way to support HPA and VPA without a Prometheus-based solution.
```

  ```go
  // The `MetricsServerConfig` resource defines settings for the MetricsServer component.
  type MetricsServerConfig struct {
    // `Enabled` is a Boolean flag that enables or disables metrics-server.
    Enabled *bool `json:"enabled,omitempty"`
    // Defines the nodes on which the pods are scheduled.
    NodeSelector map[string]string `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`
    // Defines tolerations for the pods.
    Tolerations []v1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
    // Defines resource requests and limits for the Prometheus container.
    Resources *v1.ResourceRequirements `json:"resources,omitempty"`
  }
  ```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Configuration/Enablement

Metrics Server is not enabled by default. It must be explicitly enabled by the user. It is enabled by setting 
`enabled: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` under `metricsServer` section

#### Resource Impact

> Once metrics-server is enabled, by default 2 replicas of `metrics-server` instances are being deployed in the openshift-monitoring namespace.

Reviewer 2: (nit) mention that it will be 2 replicas for multi-nodes clusters and 1 for SNO clusters.

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

### Test Plan

The proposed solution will be tested with two suites:

* Unit tests - running independently of each other and without side effects
* End to end tests - in the same repository as the cluster-monitoring-operator. These tests will be executed against an actual Kubernetes cluster and are intended to verify end-to-end functionality of the entire system.

E2E Test will test following:
  * Enables metrics-server
  * Verifies that the resource metrics API is working
  * Disables metrics-server
  * Verifies that the resource metrics API is working
  * During all the test, it will ensure that there's no disruption of the resource metrics API.

### Graduation Criteria

The main rationale behind adopting a phased approach is to prevent customers from encountering problems with the metrics-server without a contingency plan in place. This approach ensures a mechanism for reverting to the previous/legacy deployment if needed.

> * 4.15 TechPreview

Reviewer 2: I think that we can even negotiate GA for 4.15 (as opt-in) if we manage to merge soon enough in the cycle.

- In `4.19` remove the prometheus-adapter from CMO code base completely.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

TBD

### Version Skew Strategy

TBD

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

`metrics-server` will be deployed in HA mode (2 replicas by default). We will define Pod AntiAffinity Rule in `metrics-server` Deployment spec and create `PodDisruptionBudget` config to meet HA criteria.

`KubeAggregatedAPIErrors` and `KubeAggregatedAPIDown` alerts already exist to monitor the `APIService`. Additionaly metrics-server exposes [internal metrices](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server/blob/796fc0f832c1ac444c44f88a952be87524456e07/pkg/server/metrics.go#L29-L46). A few of the metrices that can be useful:

1. `tick_duration_seconds` : The total time spent collecting and storing metrics in seconds

1. `request_duration_seconds` : Duration of requests to Kubelet API in seconds

1. `request_total` : Number of requests sent to Kubelet API

1. `points` : Number of metrics points stored

#### Failure Modes

N/A

#### Support Procedures

TBD

## Implementation History

N/A

## Alternatives

> 1. The alternative would be creating standalone Metrics Server operator that would work in conjuntion with CMO.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The alternative would be creating a standalone Metrics Server operator that would work in conjuntion with CMO.
```

But for the foreseeable future we’ll have CMO in the picture, but with a reduced profile.

> So CMO to deploy metrics-server and managing is a better option since CMO manages prometheus-adapter so 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
So CMO deploying metrics-server and managing is a better option since CMO manages prometheus-adapter and 
```

* Moving `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` config-map to a Custom Resource

## Proposal

The proposal is to replace the Prometheus Adapter with the Metrics Server for monitoring resource metrics in OpenShift.

### Workflow Description

The workflow for using the Metrics Server in OpenShift for monitoring resource metrics would involve the following steps:

1. User sets `enabled: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` under `metricsServer` section

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:
      name: cluster-monitoring-config
      namespace: openshift-monitoring
    data:
      config.yaml: |
        metricsServer:
          enabled: true
    ```

With this configuration, the cluster monitoring operator should:
  1. Deploy the metrics-server resources in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace
  1. Verify that the `metrics-server` service is functional by querying the `/readyz` endpoint
  1. Wait for `5 x metrics-server's scrape interval` to have enough data populated in `metrics-server` in-memory
  1. Update `APIService` resource to point to `metrics-server` API instead of `prometheus-adapter` API

>   1. Delete `prometheus-adapter` resources

Reviewer 4: what would happen if they set `enabled: false` after that?

Author: It will be recreating prometheus-adapter and deleting metrics-server once prometheus-adapter is functional

Reviewer 2: I think that it's worth detailing the workflow in the proposal.

Author: updated

#### Variation [optional]

NA

### API Extensions

- We propose to add type `metricsServer` to the `openshift-montoring/cluster-monitoring-config` configmap to define 
  metrics-server settings. 

  ```go
  type ClusterMonitoringConfiguration struct {
    ...
    // `MetricsServerConfig` defines settings for the MetricsServer component.
    MetricsServerConfig *MetricsServerConfig `json:"metricsServer,omitempty"`
  }
  ```

  When `enabled` is set `true`, the cluster monitoring operator configures the Metrics Server resources in `openshift-monitoring` namespace and tears down the Prometheus adapter resources once Metrics Server is fully functional.

  ```go
  // The `MetricsServerConfig` resource defines settings for the MetricsServer component.
  type MetricsServerConfig struct {
    // `Enabled` is a Boolean flag that enables or disables metrics-server.
    Enabled *bool `json:"enabled,omitempty"`
    // Defines the nodes on which the pods are scheduled.

>     NodeSelector map[string]string `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`

Reviewer 4: I think NodeSelector is a good name here, but I just want to mention that a --node-selector option was recently added to metrics-server https://github.com/yangjunmyfm192085/metrics-server/blob/8ac883d7747e53a459e49ee30e3827089f593430/docs/command-line-flags.txt#L23 and it is doing something a bit different than this. It is not released yet, but if we ever enable downstream, it might become confusing, unless it is part of some kind of Kubelet configuration inside of the MetricsServerConfig.

Author: ok IIUC new field is to select nodes to scrape metrics. NodeSelector was used for all other components, may be we should use another name here considering same upstream flag will be upcoming for metrics-server

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the heads-up! I'd stick with `nodeSelector` here to be consistent with the other monitoring components. When CMO wants to support the new `--node-selector` argument, we'll need to make it explicit which setting applies to what (either by naming or documentation or both).

But we may not look for a 1:1 API mapping between CMO and metrics-server. If the main goal is to skip nodes, we might as well use a predefined label (e.g. `openshift.io/node-metrics: false`) and users would put it on nodes that shouldn't be queried by metrics-server.

Reviewer 4: Yes the new flag is to the select the nodes to scrape metrics on.

Yeah I also think that sticking with `nodeSelector` here and potentially diverging from upstream later is the best option from a UX perspective.

    // Defines tolerations for the pods.
    Tolerations []v1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
    // Defines resource requests and limits for the Prometheus container.
    Resources *v1.ResourceRequirements `json:"resources,omitempty"`
  }
  ```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Configuration/Enablement

Metrics Server is not enabled by default. It must be explicitly enabled by the user. It is enabled by setting 
`enabled: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` under `metricsServer` section

#### Resource Impact

Once metrics-server is enabled, by default 2 replicas of `metrics-server` instances are being deployed for for multi-nodes clusters and 1 for SNO clusters in the openshift-monitoring namespace.

Once metrics-server is fully functional (after 5 scrape cycles done by metrics-server) we will remove `prometheus-adapter` resources fully.

### Risks and Mitigations

> When considering equal scrape intervals, both metrics-server and prometheus-adapter have a comparable impact. This similarity arises from the fact that both applications perform a kubelet scrape once per instance within the designated scrape interval.

Reviewer 4: We will actually be doing one additional scrape with metrics-server enabled.

With prometheus-adapter only Prometheus scrapes kubelet, but with metrics-server you need both Prometheus and metrics-server to scrape the kubelet in order to also get container metrics in Prometheus.

  // The `MetricsServerConfig` resource defines settings for the MetricsServer component.

>   type MetricsServerConfig struct {

Reviewer 2: sorry I missed it in previous reviews but we have a few moe prometheus adapter settings that we need to port.
```suggestion
  type MetricsServerConfig struct {
    Audit *Audit `json:"audit,omitempty"`
```

    // Defines the nodes on which the pods are scheduled.
    NodeSelector map[string]string `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`
    // Defines tolerations for the pods.
    Tolerations []v1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
    // Defines resource requests and limits for the Prometheus container.

>     Resources *v1.ResourceRequirements `json:"resources,omitempty"`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Resources *v1.ResourceRequirements `json:"resources,omitempty"`
    // Defines a pod's topology spread constraints.
    TopologySpreadConstraints []v1.TopologySpreadConstraint `json:"topologySpreadConstraints,omitempty"`
    
```

  }
  ```

The cluster monitoring operator will check the presence of the `MetricsServer` FeatureGate: if present, it will configure the Metrics

> Server resources in `openshift-monitoring` namespace and tears down the Prometheus Adapter resources once Metrics Server is fully functional. We will use the nodeSelector, tolerations and resources settings from the Prometheus Adapter configuration when the upgrade

Reviewer 2: (nit) to make the sentence more generic.
```suggestion
Server resources in `openshift-monitoring` namespace and tears down the Prometheus Adapter resources once Metrics Server is fully functional. We will use the Prometheus Adapter settings to configure the Metrics server when the upgrade
```

happens to avoid unpleasant surprises for users.

### Test Plan

The proposed solution will be tested with two suites:

* Unit tests - running independently of each other and without side effects
* End to end tests - in the same repository as the cluster-monitoring-operator. These tests will be executed against an actual Kubernetes cluster and are intended to verify end-to-end functionality of the entire system.

E2E Test will test following:
* Enables metrics-server
* Verifies that the resource metrics API is working
* During the test, it will ensure that there's no disruption of the resource metrics API.

> TechPreview jobs will be created for cluster monitoringoperator and metrics-server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
TechPreview jobs will be configured for the cluster monitoring operator and metrics-server repositories.
```

### Graduation Criteria

The main rationale behind adopting a phased approach is to prevent customers from encountering problems with the metrics-server without a contingency plan in place. This approach ensures a mechanism for reverting to the previous/legacy deployment if needed.

* 4.15 TechPreview
  * Notice in the release notes that prometheus-adapter is deprecated (should be repeated on every future release).
* 4.16 GA as opt-in
* 4.17 GA as opt-in, warn about prometheus-adapter being deprecated if `prometheus-adapter` config isn’t empty and `metrics-server` isn’t already enabled. CMO should report `Upgradeable=false` if the prometheus-adapter config isn't empty.
* 4.18 GA, enabled by default
* 4.19 => Remove `prometheus-adapter` from CMO

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale).
* Sufficient time for feedback including signals from telemetry about the customer adoption
  * We will be adding a Gauge Metric named `cluster_monitoring_operator_metrics_server_enabled` in [cmo](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/master/pkg/metrics/metrics.go) to measure this.

> * Counter-measures to avoid service degradation of the Kubelet.

Reviewer 4: I wonder if this really makes sense to do.

Scraping kubelet is only fragile on SNO and since Prometheus will not be scraping kubelet there anymore, having metrics-server would have the same impact as the current setup

Reviewer 2: We'll still have Prometheus scraping kubelet's metrics from /metrics/cadvisor (cAdvisor) and /metrics for generic monitoring & alerting.

Reviewer 4: Oh I see, reading the enhancement I somehow thought that only metrics-server would be kept on SNO

#### Removing a deprecated feature

We will add a notice in the `4.15` release notes that `prometheus-adapter` is deprecated. The information should be repeated until Metrics server becomes GA.

In the OCP release following the GA graduation of Metrics server, we will remove the prometheus-adapter support from the CMO code base.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> When promoting the feature gate to FA, we will verify that CMO is able to deal with OCP downgrade. We will not look for 100% availability of the resource metrics API during the downgrade though.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When promoting the feature gate to GA, we will verify that CMO is able to deal with OCP downgrade. We will not look for 100% availability of the resource metrics API during the downgrade though.
```

1. `request_total` : Number of requests sent to Kubelet API

1. `points` : Number of metrics points stored

#### Failure Modes

N/A

#### Support Procedures

N/A

## Implementation History

N/A

## Alternatives

1. The alternative would be creating a standalone Metrics Server operator that would work in conjuntion with CMO.
But for the foreseeable future we’ll have CMO in the picture, but with a reduced profile.
So CMO deploying metrics-server and managing is a better option since CMO manages prometheus-adapter and 
it will already have info to delete those while switching to metrics-server. Having independent operators
could make migration trickier as we need a way for both operators to collaborate. It also avoids the overhead
to maintain and manage another operator and we can utilize existing test framework available in CMO to do
e2e testing as well.

1. Another approach involves deploying the metrics-server through CRD-based configuration. Given that all other configurations are provided via the `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` Config Map, this seems to be a more organized approach for the sake of clarity.

> 

Reviewer 4: Another alternative could be to have metrics-server managed by CVO. As far as I can tell, this could especially make sense on SNO, but it would require a hard switch from prometheus-adapter.

Reviewer 2: Isn't this equivalent to the first alternative (e.g. a dedicated metrics-server-operator)?

Reviewer 4: Thinking about it again, yes it is fairly similar

### Goals

* Replace Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server while maintaining feature parity with the existing stack 
* Ensure no performance regression occurs when replacing Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server
* Improved scale up time for autoscaling

### Non-Goals

* Allow optional cluster monitoring stack
* Moving `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` config-map to a Custom Resource

## Proposal

The proposal is to replace the Prometheus Adapter with the Metrics Server for monitoring resource metrics in OpenShift.

### Workflow Description

The workflow for using the Metrics Server in OpenShift for monitoring resource metrics would involve the following steps:

1. User enables `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` featureset

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
    kind: FeatureGate
    metadata:
      name: cluster
    spec:
      featureSet: TechPreviewNoUpgrade
    ```

    With this configuration, the cluster monitoring operator should:
    1. Deploy the `metrics-server` resources in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace

>     1. Verify that the `metrics-server` service is functional by querying the `/readyz` endpoint

Reviewer 2: I think that we gave up the idea to probe the /readyz endpoint but rather leverage the Kubernetes capabilities:
```suggestion
    1. Wait for the metrics-server task to be complete which involves the metrics-server deployment and service being ready.
```

We need to do performance testing on a larger OpenShift cluster (more than 100 nodes) and more than 70 pods on per node to measure the performance of Metrics Server. This is based on scalability table mentioned in [metrics-server](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server#scaling). [MON-3328](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3328) is created for doing this.

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

We will add a new feature gate `MetricsServer` which will be enabled by default in the `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set.

For the cluster monitoring operator, we propose to add a type `metricsServer` to the `openshift-montoring/cluster-monitoring-config` configmap defining the
metrics-server settings such as pod placement and resource requirements.

  ```go
  type ClusterMonitoringConfiguration struct {
    ...
    // `MetricsServerConfig` defines settings for the MetricsServer component.
    MetricsServerConfig *MetricsServerConfig `json:"metricsServer,omitempty"`
  }

  // The `MetricsServerConfig` resource defines settings for the MetricsServer component.
  type MetricsServerConfig struct {
    // Defines the audit configuration used by the Metrics Server instance.

>     Audit *Audit `json:"audit,omitempty"`

Reviewer 5: from https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/release-4.15/pkg/manifests/types.go#L126-L135, there is not setting for `Audit`

Author: Right not all fields are completed in TechPreview.

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale).
* Sufficient time for feedback
* Conduct load testing.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

We will add a notice in the `4.15` release notes that `prometheus-adapter` is deprecated. The information should be repeated until Metrics server becomes GA.

In the OCP release following the GA graduation of Metrics server, we will remove the prometheus-adapter support from the CMO code base. We will also drop the  `MetricsServer` [FeatureGate](https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/b86761094ee3d5aa3a94a521ba50081de65a6522/config/v1/types_feature.go#L185) from the `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` FeatureSet.

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

When promoting the feature gate to GA, we will verify that CMO is able to deal with OCP downgrade. We will not look for 100% availability of the resource metrics API during the downgrade though.

### Version Skew Strategy

N/A

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

`metrics-server` will be deployed in HA mode (2 replicas by default). We will define Pod AntiAffinity Rule in `metrics-server` Deployment spec and create `PodDisruptionBudget` config to meet HA criteria.

> `KubeAggregatedAPIErrors` and `KubeAggregatedAPIDown` alerts already exist to monitor the `APIService`. Additionaly metrics-server exposes [internal metrices](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server/blob/796fc0f832c1ac444c44f88a952be87524456e07/pkg/server/metrics.go#L29-L46). A few of the metrices that can be useful:

Reviewer 2: s/metrices/metrics/

    1. Delete `prometheus-adapter` resources

### API Extensions

No new API extensions are required. For tech preview, the only update required
is the addition of a `MetricsServer` feature gate to the OpenShift API
`TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set. See [Design Details](#design-details) for
the specifics.

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints

#### Impact for Hosted Control Planes (HyperShift)

1. The existing resource metrics API implementation, prometheus-adapter, is deployed on the guest cluster's data plane by CMO which is itself deployed by the Cluster Version operator. The same will be true for the Metrics server because it requires kubelet scraping. Consequently, we don't anticipate any effects on Hypershift as part of this enhancement.

#### Configuration/Enablement

Initially the Metrics Server must be explicitly enabled by the user by configuring the `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set. 

#### Resource Impact

Once metrics-server is enabled, by default 2 replicas of `metrics-server` instances are being deployed for for multi-nodes clusters and 1 for SNO clusters in the openshift-monitoring namespace.

> Once metrics-server is fully functional (after 5 scrape cycles done by metrics-server) we will remove `prometheus-adapter` resources fully.

Author: Did you mean we don't need to wait 5 scrapes? I see `initialDelaySeconds` is added to readiness probe which waits till 2 scrapes are done

> Once metrics-server is fully functional (after 5 scrape cycles done by metrics-server) we will remove `prometheus-adapter` resources fully.

Reviewer 4: I am not entirely sure how you were planning to implement it, but just waiting for metrics-server to report ready on its `readyz` endpoint should be good enough since we already have internal logic there to make sure that it is ready to serve metrics.

> Once metrics-server is fully functional (after 5 scrape cycles done by metrics-server) we will remove `prometheus-adapter` resources fully.

Reviewer 2: I think that I already suggested it previously so :+1: for me. It should be enough for CMO to wait for the metrics-server deployment to be ready I believe.

* End to end tests - in the same repository as the cluster-monitoring-operator. These tests will be executed against an actual Kubernetes cluster and are intended to verify end-to-end functionality of the entire system.

E2E Test will test following:
* Enables metrics-server
* Verifies that the resource metrics API is working
* During the test, it will ensure that there's no disruption of the resource metrics API.

TechPreview jobs will be configured for the cluster monitoring operator and metrics-server repositories.

### Graduation Criteria

The main rationale behind adopting a phased approach is to do:
- More testing
- Conduct Peformance testing on larger cluster
- Sufficient time for feedback

* 4.15 TechPreview
  * Notice in the release notes that prometheus-adapter is deprecated (should be repeated on every future release).
* 4.16 GA, the `MetricsServer` feature gate will be enabled in the default feature set.

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale).
* Sufficient time for feedback including signals from telemetry about the customer adoption

>   * We will be adding a Gauge Metric named `cluster_monitoring_operator_metrics_server_enabled` in [cmo](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/master/pkg/metrics/metrics.go) to measure this.

Author: @simonpasquier I am wondering if we would need this now since we moved to featuregates and metrics server will enabled by default on tech preview? Shouldn't we able to use any existing metrics to see how many techpreview clusters created for 4.15?

Reviewer 2: correct we don't need the extra metric in CMO.

* Conduct load testing.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

We will add a notice in the `4.15` release notes that `prometheus-adapter` is deprecated. The information should be repeated until Metrics server becomes GA.

> In the OCP release following the GA graduation of Metrics server, we will remove the prometheus-adapter support from the CMO code base.

Author: Right, I think we will be moving the Featuregate to GA by moving it to default set
https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/b86761094ee3d5aa3a94a521ba50081de65a6522/config/v1/types_feature.go#L193-L205

> In the OCP release following the GA graduation of Metrics server, we will remove the prometheus-adapter support from the CMO code base.

Reviewer 4: You might still want to remove the feature gate at some point, if it is not gating an implementation anymore

### Non-Goals

* Allow optional cluster monitoring stack
* Moving `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` config-map to a Custom Resource

## Proposal

The proposal is to replace the Prometheus Adapter with the Metrics Server for monitoring resource metrics in OpenShift.

### Workflow Description

The workflow for using the Metrics Server in OpenShift for monitoring resource metrics would involve the following steps:

1. User enables `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` featureset

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: config.openshift.io/v1
    kind: FeatureGate
    metadata:
      name: cluster
    spec:
      featureSet: TechPreviewNoUpgrade
    ```

    With this configuration, the cluster monitoring operator should:
    1. Deploy the `metrics-server` resources in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace
    1. Verify that the `metrics-server` service is functional by querying the `/readyz` endpoint
    1. Wait for `5 x metrics-server's scrape interval` to have enough data populated in `metrics-server` in-memory
    1. Update `APIService` resource to point to `metrics-server` API instead of `prometheus-adapter` API
    1. Delete `prometheus-adapter` resources

> ### HyperShift Assumptions

Reviewer 2: suggestion: maybe move this as a sub-section of `Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints`?
```suggestion
### Impact for Hosted Control Planes (HyperShift)
```

> 1. The existing resource metrics API implementation, prometheus-adapter, is deployed on the guest cluster's data plane, so will be metrics-server, because it requires kubelet scraping. Consequently, we don't anticipate any effects on Hypershift due to this enhancement.

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
The existing resource metrics API implementation, prometheus-adapter, is deployed on the guest cluster's data plane by CMO which is itself deployed by the Cluster Version operator. The same will be true for the Metrics server because it requires kubelet scraping. Consequently, we don't anticipate any effects on Hypershift as part of this enhancement.
```

> #### Variation [optional]
> 
> NA

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

### API Extensions

No new API extensions are required. For tech preview, the only update required
is the addition of a `MetricsServer` feature gate to the OpenShift API
`TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set. See [Design Details](#design-details) for
the specifics.

> ### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints
```

#### Configuration/Enablement

> Metrics Server is not enabled by default since its a TechPreview feature. It must be explicitly enabled by the user by enabling `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Initially the Metrics Server must be explicitly enabled by the user by configuring the `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set. 
```

  type ClusterMonitoringConfiguration struct {
    ...
    // `MetricsServerConfig` defines settings for the MetricsServer component.
    MetricsServerConfig *MetricsServerConfig `json:"metricsServer,omitempty"`
  }
  ```

  ```go
  // The `MetricsServerConfig` resource defines settings for the MetricsServer component.
  type MetricsServerConfig struct {
    // Defines the nodes on which the pods are scheduled.
    NodeSelector map[string]string `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`
    // Defines tolerations for the pods.
    Tolerations []v1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
    // Defines resource requests and limits for the Prometheus container.
    Resources *v1.ResourceRequirements `json:"resources,omitempty"`
  }
  ```

When `TechPreviewNoUpgrade` feature set is enabled, the cluster-monitoring-operator will check whether `MetricsServer` FeatureGate is enabled and configures the Metrics
Server resources in `openshift-monitoring` namespace and tears down the Prometheus Adapter resources once Metrics Server is fully functional. We will use nodeSelector, tolerations and resources same that as Prometheus Adapter when the switch
happens to avoid unpleasant surprises for users.

> ### Open Questions [optional]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

E2E Test will test following:
* Enables metrics-server
* Verifies that the resource metrics API is working
* During the test, it will ensure that there's no disruption of the resource metrics API.

### Graduation Criteria

The main rationale behind adopting a phased approach is to do:
- More testing
- Conduct Peformance testing on larger cluster
- Sufficient time for feedback

* 4.15 TechPreview
  * Notice in the release notes that prometheus-adapter is deprecated (should be repeated on every future release).
* 4.16 GA, warn about prometheus-adapter being deprecated if `prometheus-adapter` config isn’t empty and `metrics-server` isn’t already enabled. CMO should report `Upgradeable=false` if the prometheus-adapter config isn't empty.
* 4.17 GA, enabled by default

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale).
* Sufficient time for feedback including signals from telemetry about the customer adoption
  * We will be adding a Gauge Metric named `cluster_monitoring_operator_metrics_server_enabled` in [cmo](https://github.com/openshift/cluster-monitoring-operator/blob/master/pkg/metrics/metrics.go) to measure this.

> * Counter-measures to avoid service degradation of the Kubelet.

Reviewer 2: I don't think that these items apply anymore.

* Conduct load testing.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

> Add notice in `4.15` release notes that `prometheus-adapter` is deprecated and should be repeated on every future releases.

Reviewer 2: (nit)
```suggestion
We will add a notice in the `4.15` release notes that `prometheus-adapter` is deprecated. The information should be repeated until Metrics server becomes GA.
```

> - In `4.17` remove the prometheus-adapter from CMO code base completely.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the OCP release following the GA graduation of Metrics server, we will remove the prometheus-adapter support from the CMO code base.
```

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

> TBD

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When promoting the feature gate to FA, we will verify that CMO is able to deal with OCP downgrade. We will not look for 100% availability of the resource metrics API during the downgrade though.
```

### Version Skew Strategy

> TBD

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Not applicable.
```

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

`metrics-server` will be deployed in HA mode (2 replicas by default). We will define Pod AntiAffinity Rule in `metrics-server` Deployment spec and create `PodDisruptionBudget` config to meet HA criteria.

`KubeAggregatedAPIErrors` and `KubeAggregatedAPIDown` alerts already exist to monitor the `APIService`. Additionaly metrics-server exposes [internal metrices](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server/blob/796fc0f832c1ac444c44f88a952be87524456e07/pkg/server/metrics.go#L29-L46). A few of the metrices that can be useful:

> 1. `tick_duration_seconds` : The total time spent collecting and storing metrics in seconds

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `metrics_server_manager_tick_duration_seconds` : The total time spent collecting and storing metrics in seconds
```

> 1. `request_duration_seconds` : Duration of requests to Kubelet API in seconds

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `metrics_server_kubelet_request_duration_seconds` : Duration of requests to Kubelet API in seconds.

> 1. `request_total` : Number of requests sent to Kubelet API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `metrics_server_kubelet_request_total` : Number of requests sent to Kubelet API
```

> 1. `points` : Number of metrics points stored

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `metrics_server_storage_points` : Number of metrics points stored in memory.
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We will add alerting rules to detect the following conditions:
* The collect time exceeds the metrics resolution (e.g. 15 seconds) which would decrease the accuracy.
* The Metrics server fails to scrape metrics from some kubelet targets.

These alerting rules will have a `warning` severity.
```

N/A

#### Support Procedures

N/A

## Implementation History

N/A

## Alternatives

1. The alternative would be creating a standalone Metrics Server operator that would work in conjuntion with CMO.
But for the foreseeable future we’ll have CMO in the picture, but with a reduced profile.
So CMO deploying metrics-server and managing is a better option since CMO manages prometheus-adapter and 
it will already have info to delete those while switching to metrics-server. Having independent operators
could make migration trickier as we need a way for both operators to collaborate. It also avoids the overhead
to maintain and manage another operator and we can utilize existing test framework available in CMO to do
e2e testing as well.

1. Another approach involves deploying the metrics-server through CRD-based configuration. Given that all other configurations are provided via the `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` Config Map, this seems to be a more organized approach for the sake of clarity.

However, in the context of the [MON-1100](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-1100), it could be viewed as an alternative method for defining metrics-server configurations.

> ## Infrastructure Needed [optional]
> 
> N/A

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

---
title: replace-prometheus-adapter-with-metrics-server
authors:
  - "@slashpai"
reviewers:

>   - "@simonpasquier"

Reviewer 6: Please add @mansikulkarni96 as a reviewer from a Windows perspective

  - "@dgrisonnet"
  - "@openshift/openshift-team-monitoring"
approvers: 
  - "@simonpasquier"
  - "@dgrisonnet"
  - "@openshift/openshift-team-monitoring"
api-approvers:
  - "@deads2k"
creation-date: 2023-06-20
last-updated: 2023-09-25
tracking-link:
  - https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3153
---

# Replace prometheus-adapter with metrics-server

## Summary

> This proposal suggests replacing the [Prometheus Adapter](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/prometheus-adapter) currently used for implementing the resource [metrics API](https://github.com/kubernetes/metrics) in OpenShift with the [Metrics Server](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server).

Reviewer 7: @slashpai still trying to understand this new stack but the Windows team had added some windows_exporter specific queries to the prometheus adapter: https://github.com/prometheus-operator/kube-prometheus/pull/1058. This was to collect the metrics through the top command, do we need something similar for the metrics-server?

Reviewer 4: Normally no because kubelet has a shim to support windows workload: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/pkg/kubelet/winstats/winstats.go. Kubelet normally relies on cAdvisor to get the metrics, but since it doesn't support windows, there is a dedicated shim to get these metrics. That said, this is still something that we would want to be verified by QE.

Author: cc: @juzhao for visibility

Reviewer 7: Thanks we will also test this out when opting-in to this feature.

## Proposal

The proposal is to replace the Prometheus Adapter with the Metrics Server for monitoring resource metrics in OpenShift.

### Workflow Description

The workflow for using the Metrics Server in OpenShift for monitoring resource metrics would involve the following steps:

1. User sets `enabled: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` under `metricsServer` section

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:
      name: cluster-monitoring-config
      namespace: openshift-monitoring
    data:
      config.yaml: |
        metricsServer:
          enabled: true
    ```

    With this configuration, the cluster monitoring operator should:
    1. Deploy the `metrics-server` resources in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace
    1. Verify that the `metrics-server` service is functional by querying the `/readyz` endpoint
    1. Wait for `5 x metrics-server's scrape interval` to have enough data populated in `metrics-server` in-memory
    1. Update `APIService` resource to point to `metrics-server` API instead of `prometheus-adapter` API
    1. Delete `prometheus-adapter` resources

> 1. User sets `enabled: false` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` under `metricsServer` section

Reviewer 8: Setting this should cause the cluster to be tainted in some way.  Upgradeable=false has been the mechanism used by the control-plane teams when break-glass configuration is required.  It forces us to fix the problem.

Author: Removed this section since we are moving the implementation to use FeatureGate instead of configmap to enable/disable.
https://github.com/openshift/api/pull/1615/files

> 1. User sets `enabled: false` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` under `metricsServer` section

Reviewer 8: I suggest some kind of unsupportedConfigOverride on a low-level monitoring operator resource (something like https://github.com/openshift/api/blob/master/operator/v1/types.go#L84 .  Doing that keeps a single generation for those relating spec to status.

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:
      name: cluster-monitoring-config
      namespace: openshift-monitoring
    data:
      config.yaml: |
        metricsServer:
          enabled: false
    ```

  With this configuration, the cluster monitoring operator should:
  1. Deploy the `prometheus-adapter` resources in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace
  1. Verify that the `prometheus-adapter` service is functional by querying the `/readyz` endpoint
  1. Update `APIService` resource to point to `prometheus-adapter` API instead of `metrics-server` API
  1. Delete `metrics-server` resources

#### Variation [optional]

NA

### API Extensions

- We propose to add type `metricsServer` to the `openshift-montoring/cluster-monitoring-config` configmap to define 
  metrics-server settings. 

  ```go
  type ClusterMonitoringConfiguration struct {
    ...
    // `MetricsServerConfig` defines settings for the MetricsServer component.
    MetricsServerConfig *MetricsServerConfig `json:"metricsServer,omitempty"`
  }
  ```

>   When `enabled` is set `true`, the cluster monitoring operator configures the Metrics Server resources in `openshift-monitoring` namespace and tears down the Prometheus adapter resources once Metrics Server is fully functional.

Reviewer 2: As said above by @slashpai there will be no `enabled`  setting for metrics-server. The migration should happen automatically for all customers when the feature will be GA. 
CMO should probably reuse the prometheus-adapter's settings such as nodeSelector, tolerations and resources when the switch happens to avoid unpleasant surprises for users (like they might expect that monitoring components are scheduled on infra nodes).

  ```go
  // The `MetricsServerConfig` resource defines settings for the MetricsServer component.
  type MetricsServerConfig struct {
    // `Enabled` is a Boolean flag that enables or disables metrics-server.
    Enabled *bool `json:"enabled,omitempty"`
    // Defines the nodes on which the pods are scheduled.
    NodeSelector map[string]string `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`
    // Defines tolerations for the pods.
    Tolerations []v1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
    // Defines resource requests and limits for the Prometheus container.
    Resources *v1.ResourceRequirements `json:"resources,omitempty"`
  }
  ```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Configuration/Enablement

Metrics Server is not enabled by default. It must be explicitly enabled by the user. It is enabled by setting 

> `enabled: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` under `metricsServer` section

Reviewer 2: As said above, this needs to be revised.

Author: revised

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

### Test Plan

The proposed solution will be tested with two suites:

* Unit tests - running independently of each other and without side effects
* End to end tests - in the same repository as the cluster-monitoring-operator. These tests will be executed against an actual Kubernetes cluster and are intended to verify end-to-end functionality of the entire system.

E2E Test will test following:
* Enables metrics-server
* Verifies that the resource metrics API is working
* Disables metrics-server
* Verifies that the resource metrics API is working
* During all the test, it will ensure that there's no disruption of the resource metrics API.

### Graduation Criteria

The main rationale behind adopting a phased approach is to prevent customers from encountering problems with the metrics-server without a contingency plan in place. This approach ensures a mechanism for reverting to the previous/legacy deployment if needed.

* 4.15 TechPreview
  * Notice in the release notes that prometheus-adapter is deprecated (should be repeated on every future release).

> * 4.16 GA as opt-in

Reviewer 8: I see the flow the for the "switch back to old".  I'd still suggest switching everyone and if absolutely necessary share the "reverse this" that taints the cluster so we know how many people do it.

* 4.17 GA as opt-in, warn about prometheus-adapter being deprecated if `prometheus-adapter` config isn’t empty and `metrics-server` isn’t already enabled. CMO should report `Upgradeable=false` if the prometheus-adapter config isn't empty.
* 4.18 GA, enabled by default

> * 4.19 => Remove `prometheus-adapter` from CMO

Reviewer 2: same here, we need to adjust the plan.

1. **Better Accuracy:**  By default, the Metrics Server takes into account the timestamps of metric samples, allowing for accurate tracking of resource utilization over time. This means you can rely on the Metrics Server to provide a more precise understanding of how resources are being utilized by your applications.

### User Stories

#### Story 1

* In order to provide [optional built-in monitoring](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3152) feature we need to provide a way for customers to do HPA other than through Prometheus based Prometheus Adapter.

#### Story 2

* As a cluster admin, I want a more lightweight and efficient solution for monitoring resource metrics in my cluster, so that I can optimize cluster performance and resource allocation.

#### Story 3

* As a cluster admin, I want a simplified monitoring architecture in OpenShift, so that I can reduce the complexity and maintenance overhead of the monitoring system.

### Goals

* Replace Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server while maintaining feature parity with the existing stack 

> * Ensure no performance regression occurs when replacing Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server

Author: Should we mention this in goals? We added about scalability in motivation section https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1426/files#diff-cca49f38ba880c2b13b98621e866fab0157bc4e46b82a47c045d48e4e296d36eR41

> * Ensure no performance regression occurs when replacing Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server

Reviewer 2: IIUC @dgrisonnet refers to the scale up of the application by HPA, not the scalability of metrics-server.  From the linked issue

> Scale up time is the time needed for particular autoscaling to increase number of replicas in response to increased load. For example if number of replicas needed to serve traffic has increased 2x, it's the time needed by autoscaler to make decision to increase number of replicas 2x.

> * Allow Prometheus Adapter to Metrics Server transition (and vice-versa) through a configuration or feature-flag.

Reviewer 2: Yes we can remove it as a goal.

  ```go
  type ClusterMonitoringConfiguration struct {
    ...
    // `MetricsServerConfig` defines settings for the MetricsServer component.
    MetricsServerConfig *MetricsServerConfig `json:"metricsServer,omitempty"`
  }
  ```

  When `enabled` is set `true`, the cluster monitoring operator configures the Metrics Server in `openshift-monitoring` namespace

  ```go
  // The `MetricsServerConfig` resource defines settings for the MetricsServer component.
  type MetricsServerConfig struct {
    // `Enabled` is a Boolean flag that enables or disables metrics-server.
    Enabled *bool `json:"enabled,omitempty"`
    // Defines the nodes on which the pods are scheduled.
    NodeSelector map[string]string `json:"nodeSelector,omitempty"`
    // Defines tolerations for the pods.
    Tolerations []v1.Toleration `json:"tolerations,omitempty"`
    // Defines resource requests and limits for the Prometheus container.
    Resources *v1.ResourceRequirements `json:"resources,omitempty"`
  }
  ```

### Implementation Details/Notes/Constraints [optional]

#### Configuration/Enablement

Metrics Server is not enabled by default. It must be explicitly enabled by the user. It is enabled by setting 

> `enabled: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` under `metricsServer` section

Author: So what we are planning is first allow this feature in TechPreview and later graduate it to GA. Once GA metrics-server will be enabled by default.

> `enabled: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` under `metricsServer` section

Reviewer 4: Meaning that prometheus-adapter will be the default until it reaches GA right?

My initial understanding was that you wanted to move away from prometheus-adapter completely and make metrics-server optional.

#### Resource Impact

> Once metrics-server is enabled, by default 2 replicas of `metrics-server` instances are being deployed in the openshift-monitoring namespace.

Reviewer 3: Maybe this should mention that we'll also remove the prometheus-adapter deployment?

As of OpenShift 4.13 the following idle resource usage have been measured:

Kubelet: TBD
Metrics Server: TBD

**TODO:** Capture the details on performance testing done from [MON-3210](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3210)

### Risks and Mitigations

> One of the risk is resource impact on larger clusters. We need to do performance testing on larger OpenShift cluster to measure the impact on Kubelet when metrics-server is deployed.

Reviewer 4: At equal scrape intervals, it has the same impact as prometheus-adapter because both metrics-server and Prometheus will scrape kubelet once per instance per scrape-interval

[MON-3210](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3210) is created for doing this.

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

> [Custom Metrics Autoscaler](https://github.com/openshift/custom-metrics-autoscaler-operator)(CMA) also deploys [metrics-server](https://github.com/openshift/custom-metrics-autoscaler-operator/blob/39aa2b9d5a0db2206d4963fe2e551178e7d369ad/controllers/keda/kedacontroller_controller.go#L204) when user creates keda controller after its installed, will this affect Metrics Server we deploy in monitoring stack?

Reviewer 3: I think multiple metrics-server deployments should be fine, as long as only one operator creates an APIService for a given resource metrics API.

Reviewer 4: To give more info about the relation between Keda and metrics-server, Keda has two types of scalers "CPU" and "Memory" using metrics from metrics-server. But these scalers require the installation of metrics-server, Keda is not deploying it by itself.
https://keda.sh/docs/2.11/scalers/cpu/

### Test Plan

The proposed solution will be tested with two suites:

* Unit tests - running independently of each other and without side effects

> * End to end tests - in the same repository as the cluster-monitoring-operator. These tests will be executed against an actual Kubernetes cluster and are intended to verify end-to-end functionality of the entire system.

Reviewer 2: With more details: there should be an end-to-end test that
* Enables metrics-server
* Verifies that the resource metrics API is working
* Disables metrics-server
* Verifies that the resource metrics API is working
During all the test, it will ensure that there's no disruption of the resource metrics API.

### Graduation Criteria

* 4.14 TechPreview
  * Notice in the release notes that prometheus-adapter is deprecated (should be repeated on every future release).
* 4.15  GA as opt-in
* 4.16 GA as opt-in, warn about prometheus-adapter being deprecated if `prometheus-adapter` config isn’t empty and `metrics-server` isn’t already enabled.
* 4.17 GA, enabled by default

> * 4.18 => Remove `prometheus-adapter` from CMO

Reviewer 4: I mentioned it a bit in a previous comment, but why can't we just replace prometheus-adapter by metrics-server?

Reviewer 4: fair enough

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale).

> * Sufficient time for feedback including signals from telemetry about the customer adoption (e.g. number of metrics-server deployment across the fleet).

Reviewer 2: we can describe how the telemetry metric will look like.

Author: I will update this section

* Counter-measures to avoid service degradation of the Kubelet.
* Conduct load testing.

> #### Removing a deprecated feature

Reviewer 2: we can add details here about removal of prometheus-adapter.

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing feature
- Deprecate the feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

TBD

### Version Skew Strategy

TBD

> ### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

Reviewer 2: Please add details about which metrics and alerting rules can be used to monitor metrics-server (even existing alerts.
With telemetry, we can get insights on how well/bad metrics-server works.

Reviewer 2: KubeAggregatedAPIErrors and KubeAggregatedAPIDown already exist today.

Reviewer 4: metrics-server actually has its own metrics on top of the Kubernetes ones: https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server/blob/796fc0f832c1ac444c44f88a952be87524456e07/pkg/server/metrics.go#L29-L46

      labels:
        app.kubernetes.io/component: metrics-server
        app.kubernetes.io/name: metrics-server
        app.kubernetes.io/part-of: openshift-monitoring
    spec:
      affinity:
        podAntiAffinity:
          requiredDuringSchedulingIgnoredDuringExecution:
          - labelSelector:
              matchLabels:
                app.kubernetes.io/component: metrics-server
                app.kubernetes.io/name: metrics-server
                app.kubernetes.io/part-of: openshift-monitoring
            namespaces:
            - openshift-monitoring
            topologyKey: kubernetes.io/hostname
...
```

```yaml
apiVersion: policy/v1
kind: PodDisruptionBudget
metadata:
  labels:
    app.kubernetes.io/name: metrics-server
    app.kubernetes.io/part-of: openshift-monitoring
  name: metrics-server
  namespace: openshift-monitoring
spec:
  minAvailable: 1
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/name: metrics-server
      app.kubernetes.io/component: metrics-server
      app.kubernetes.io/part-of: openshift-monitoring
```

#### Failure Modes

TBD

#### Support Procedures

TBD

## Implementation History

N/A

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer 3: We also discussed using a [config] CRD to configure metrics-server. This might be worth mentioning here as well.

* Ensure no performance regression occurs when replacing Prometheus Adapter with Metrics Server

### Non-Goals

* Allow optional cluster monitoring stack
* Moving `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` config-map to a Custom Resource

## Proposal

The proposal is to replace the Prometheus Adapter with the Metrics Server for monitoring resource metrics in OpenShift.

### Workflow Description

The workflow for using the Metrics Server in OpenShift for monitoring resource metrics would involve the following steps:

1. User sets `enabled: true` in the ConfigMap `openshift-monitoring/cluster-monitoring-config` under `metricsServer` section

    ```yaml
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ConfigMap
    metadata:
      name: cluster-monitoring-config
      namespace: openshift-monitoring
    data:
      config.yaml: |
        metricsServer:
          enabled: true
    ```

With this configuration, the cluster monitoring operator should:
  1. Deploy the metrics-server resources in the `openshift-monitoring` namespace
  1. Verify that the `metrics-server` service is functional by querying the `/-/readyz` endpoint

>   1. Wait for a couple of minutes ( 2 to 3 scrape cycles) to have enough data populated in `metrics-server` in memory 

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest waiting for 5 times the scrape interval to account for potentially failed scrapes.
```suggestion
  1. Wait for ` 5 x metrics-server's scrape interval`  to have enough data populated in `metrics-server` in memory 
```

### Risks and Mitigations

One of the risk is resource impact on larger clusters. We need to do performance testing on larger OpenShift cluster (more than 100 nodes) and more than 70 pods on per node to measure the performance of Metrics Server. This is based on scalability table mentioned in [metrics-server](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/metrics-server#scaling).

[MON-3210](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/MON-3210) is created for doing this.

### Drawbacks

N/A

## Design Details

### Open Questions [optional]

### Test Plan

The proposed solution will be tested with two suites:

* Unit tests - running independently of each other and without side effects
* End to end tests - in the same repository as the cluster-monitoring-operator. These tests will be executed against an actual Kubernetes cluster and are intended to verify end-to-end functionality of the entire system.

E2E Test will test following:
  * Enables metrics-server
  * Verifies that the resource metrics API is working
  * Disables metrics-server
  * Verifies that the resource metrics API is working
  * During all the test, it will ensure that there's no disruption of the resource metrics API.

> ### Graduation Criteria

Reviewer 2: @slashpai can you add a rationale about the phased approach (e.g. the outcome of the discussion below with @dgrisonnet )?

* 4.14 TechPreview
  * Notice in the release notes that prometheus-adapter is deprecated (should be repeated on every future release).

> * 4.15  GA as opt-in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* 4.15 GA as opt-in
```

> * 4.16 GA as opt-in, warn about prometheus-adapter being deprecated if `prometheus-adapter` config isn’t empty and `metrics-server` isn’t already enabled.

Reviewer 2: At this stage, CMO should report Upgradeable=false if the prometheus-adapter config isn't empty (e.g. the cluster admin configured node placement or resource requirements or ...) .

* 4.17 GA, enabled by default
* 4.18 => Remove `prometheus-adapter` from CMO

#### Dev Preview -> Tech Preview

N/A

#### Tech Preview -> GA

More testing (upgrade, downgrade, scale).
* Sufficient time for feedback including signals from telemetry about the customer adoption (e.g. number of metrics-server deployment across the fleet).
* Counter-measures to avoid service degradation of the Kubelet.
* Conduct load testing.

#### Removing a deprecated feature

- Announce deprecation and support policy of the existing feature
- Deprecate the feature

### Upgrade / Downgrade Strategy

TBD

### Version Skew Strategy

TBD

### Operational Aspects of API Extensions

`metrics-server` will be deployed in HA mode (2 replicas by default). We will define Pod AntiAffinity Rule in `metrics-server` Deployment spec and create `PodDisruptionBudget` config to meet HA criteria.

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: (nit) I wouldn't include the YAML manifests in the proposal.
